Add disk corruption online case for ZK (#12)
fvaleri/strimzi-debugging: sessions/006/README.md

$ kubectl create -f sessions/001/resources/001-my-topic.yaml
kafkatopic.kafka.strimzi.io/my-topic created
```

When the cluster is ready, break zookeeper by creating 3 topics with 1000 partitions each, which exceeds the disk capacity of 1 MiB.

```sh
$ CLUSTER_NAME="my-cluster" \
  ZK_PODS="$(kubectl get po -l strimzi.io/name=my-cluster-zookeeper --no-headers -o custom-columns=':metadata.name')" \
  NEW_PV_CLASS="$(kubectl get pv | grep my-cluster-zookeeper-0 | awk '{print $7}')" \
  NEW_PV_SIZE="100Mi"

$ kubectl get pvc -l strimzi.io/name=$CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper
NAME                          STATUS   VOLUME                                     CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   STORAGECLASS                           AGE
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-0   Bound    pvc-8f3ddfba-e73a-4469-92e1-c8abc62006cc   1Mi        RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   6m45s
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-1   Bound    pvc-f6b43572-30ff-4423-a2eb-50d6733c55ec   1Mi        RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   6m45s
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-2   Bound    pvc-90f07fde-7482-4764-b013-a04aac4e41fb   1Mi        RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   6m45s

> 

Reviewer: Remove empty line.

persistentvolume "pvc-f6b43572-30ff-4423-a2eb-50d6733c55ec" deleted

$ kubectl patch pv $(kubectl get pv | grep "$CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper" | awk '{print $1}') --type merge -p '
    spec:
      persistentVolumeReclaimPolicy: Delete'
persistentvolume/pvc-62dc40e2-8732-4563-bd9c-97a480f35dbf patched
persistentvolume/pvc-d33f37a9-de7e-4b6a-8ab1-e0522571ebb1 patched
persistentvolume/pvc-e56566de-8b03-4505-8872-f12603dea51f patched

$ kubectl get pv | grep $CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper
pvc-62dc40e2-8732-4563-bd9c-97a480f35dbf   100Mi      RWO            Delete           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-2                                     ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            6m28s
pvc-d33f37a9-de7e-4b6a-8ab1-e0522571ebb1   100Mi      RWO            Delete           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-1                                     ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            6m30s
pvc-e56566de-8b03-4505-8872-f12603dea51f   100Mi      RWO            Delete           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-0                                     ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            6m31s
```

> 

Reviewer: Remove empty line.

<br/>

---

> ### Example: ZooKeeper storage failure with lost quorum (online recovery)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: online ZooKeeper recovery from corrupted storage
```

This procedure has some tricky steps highlighted in bold, where you need to be extra careful to avoid losing data.
**Don't use Minikube for this example, as it doesn't have full volume support.**

> First, [deploy the Strimzi Cluster Operator](/sessions/001).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, [deploy the Strimzi Cluster Operator and Kafka cluster](/sessions/001).
```

> 

Reviewer: Remove empty line.

> When the cluster is ready, break 1 zookeeper node by writing corrupted data into ZK log.

Reviewer: I like this, but the title says "with lost quorum", so we should break two of them.

```sh
$ CLUSTER_NAME="my-cluster" \

>   ZK_PODS="$(kubectl get po -l strimzi.io/name=my-cluster-zookeeper --no-headers -o custom-columns=':metadata.name')" \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ZK_PODS="$(kubectl get po -l strimzi.io/name=$CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper --no-headers -o custom-columns=':metadata.name')"
```

> $ kubectl exec -it $CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper-0 -- bash -c "echo 'test' > /var/lib/zookeeper/data/version-2/log.200000001"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ kubectl exec $CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper-0 -- sh -c "echo 'test' > /var/lib/zookeeper/data/version-2/log.200000001"
```

$ kubectl delete po $CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper-0
pod "my-cluster-zookeeper-0" deleted

$ kubectl get po -l strimzi.io/name=$CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper
NAME                     READY   STATUS             RESTARTS        AGE
my-cluster-zookeeper-0   0/1     CrashLoopBackOff   5 (2m16s ago)   16m
my-cluster-zookeeper-1   1/1     Running            0               16m
my-cluster-zookeeper-2   1/1     Running            0               16m

$ kubectl logs $CLUSTER_NAME-zoookeeper-0 | grep "Unable to load database on disk" | tail -n1
2024-03-01 08:53:40,806 ERROR Unable to load database on disk (org.apache.zookeeper.server.quorum.QuorumPeer) [main]
```

> We need to delete the node to save the storage in the failed node.

Reviewer: But we are deleting the entire cluster here, which becomes offline.

**Before deleting the Kafka cluster, make sure that delete claim storage configuration is set to false in Kafka resource.**

```sh
$ if [[ $(kubectl get k $CLUSTER_NAME -o yaml | yq .spec.zookeeper.storage.deleteClaim) == "false" ]]; then kubectl delete k $CLUSTER_NAME; fi
kafka.kafka.strimzi.io "my-cluster" deleted
```

> **Set the persistent volume reclaim policy to Retain, in order to avoid losing broker data when deleting Zookeeper PVCs.**

Reviewer: If we don't need to delete PVCs, then this step can be skipped.

pvc-8f3ddfba-e73a-4469-92e1-c8abc62006cc   1Mi        RWO            Retain           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-0                                     ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            11m
pvc-90f07fde-7482-4764-b013-a04aac4e41fb   1Mi        RWO            Retain           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-2                                     ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            11m
pvc-d33f37a9-de7e-4b6a-8ab1-e0522571ebb1   100Mi      RWO            Retain           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-1-new                                 ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            49s
pvc-e56566de-8b03-4505-8872-f12603dea51f   100Mi      RWO            Retain           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-0-new                                 ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            50s
pvc-f6b43572-30ff-4423-a2eb-50d6733c55ec   1Mi        RWO            Retain           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-1                                     ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            11m
```

> Remove all servers data from the Zookeeper volumes to allow it get re-synced with the leader.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remove all servers data from the Zookeeper volumes to allow it get re-synced from the leader.
```

NAME                                          READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
my-cluster-entity-operator-7d6d6bd454-sh7rc   3/3     Running   0          96s
my-cluster-kafka-0                            1/1     Running   0          5m9s
my-cluster-kafka-1                            1/1     Running   0          5m9s
my-cluster-kafka-2                            1/1     Running   0          5m9s
my-cluster-zookeeper-0                        1/1     Running   0          6m14s
my-cluster-zookeeper-1                        1/1     Running   0          6m14s
my-cluster-zookeeper-2                        1/1     Running   0          6m14s

$ kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic t0 --create

$ kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic t0 --describe
Topic: t0	TopicId: 1Sgy6V-CR0K7MMJ9khDuRw	PartitionCount: 3	ReplicationFactor: 3	Configs: min.insync.replicas=2,message.format.version=3.0-IV1
	Topic: t0	Partition: 0	Leader: 0	Replicas: 0,2,1	Isr: 0,2,1
	Topic: t0	Partition: 1	Leader: 2	Replicas: 2,1,0	Isr: 2,1,0
	Topic: t0	Partition: 2	Leader: 1	Replicas: 1,0,2	Isr: 1,0,2
```

> Finally, we set the retain policy back to Delete on new volumes.

Reviewer: Again, not needed, see previous comment.

First, [deploy the Strimzi Cluster Operator and kafka cluster](/sessions/001).

When the cluster is ready, break 1 zookeeper node by writing corrupted data into ZK log.

```sh
$ CLUSTER_NAME="my-cluster"

$ kubectl exec $CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper-0 -- sh -c "echo 'test' > /var/lib/zookeeper/data/version-2/log.200000001"  \
  && kubectl delete po $CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper-0
pod "my-cluster-zookeeper-0" deleted

$ kubectl get po -l strimzi.io/name=$CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper
NAME                     READY   STATUS             RESTARTS        AGE
my-cluster-zookeeper-0   0/1     CrashLoopBackOff   5 (2m16s ago)   16m
my-cluster-zookeeper-1   1/1     Running            0               16m
my-cluster-zookeeper-2   1/1     Running            0               16m

$ kubectl logs $CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper-0 | grep "Unable to load database on disk" | tail -n1
2024-03-01 08:53:40,806 ERROR Unable to load database on disk (org.apache.zookeeper.server.quorum.QuorumPeer) [main]
```

We need to remove all data from the failed Zookeeper volumes to allow it get re-synced with the leader.
Double check that the volume access mode is not RWOP(ReadWriteOncePod). 

> If it's the case, we can only go with offline recovery process above.

Author: I added the `RWOP` case, since for read/write mode, there are RWO(one node), RWX(many nodes), and RWOP. If it's RWOP, the only way to safe it is to delete kafka CR to save the storage.

ref: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#access-modes

Reviewer: I don't think Strimzi uses RWOP, so I would leave it out.

Author: OK, updated.

persistentvolume "pvc-f6b43572-30ff-4423-a2eb-50d6733c55ec" deleted

$ kubectl patch pv $(kubectl get pv | grep "$CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper" | awk '{print $1}') --type merge -p '
    spec:
      persistentVolumeReclaimPolicy: Delete'
persistentvolume/pvc-62dc40e2-8732-4563-bd9c-97a480f35dbf patched
persistentvolume/pvc-d33f37a9-de7e-4b6a-8ab1-e0522571ebb1 patched
persistentvolume/pvc-e56566de-8b03-4505-8872-f12603dea51f patched

$ kubectl get pv | grep $CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper
pvc-62dc40e2-8732-4563-bd9c-97a480f35dbf   100Mi      RWO            Delete           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-2                                     ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            6m28s
pvc-d33f37a9-de7e-4b6a-8ab1-e0522571ebb1   100Mi      RWO            Delete           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-1                                     ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            6m30s
pvc-e56566de-8b03-4505-8872-f12603dea51f   100Mi      RWO            Delete           Bound    test/data-my-cluster-zookeeper-0                                     ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd            6m31s
```

<br/>

---

> ### Example: online ZooKeeper recovery from corrupted storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: online ZooKeeper recovery from corrupted storage with quorum loss
```

> This procedure has some tricky steps highlighted in bold, where you need to be extra careful to avoid losing data.
> **Don't use Minikube for this example, as it doesn't have full volume support.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example has some tricky steps highlighted in bold, where you need to be extra careful to avoid losing data.
**Don't use Minikube, as it doesn't have full volume support.**
```

First, [deploy the Strimzi Cluster Operator and kafka cluster](/sessions/001).

When the cluster is ready, break 1 zookeeper node by writing corrupted data into ZK log.

```sh
$ CLUSTER_NAME="my-cluster" \
  ZK_PODS="$(kubectl get po -l strimzi.io/name=$CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper --no-headers -o custom-columns=':metadata.name')"

> $ kubectl exec $CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper-0 -- sh -c "echo 'test' > /var/lib/zookeeper/data/version-2/log.200000001"
> 
> $ kubectl delete po $CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper-0
> pod "my-cluster-zookeeper-0" deleted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ kubectl exec $CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper-0 -- sh -c "echo 'test' > /var/lib/zookeeper/data/version-2/log.200000001" \
  && kubectl delete po $CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper-0
pod "my-cluster-zookeeper-0" deleted
```

$ kubectl get po -l strimzi.io/name=$CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper
NAME                     READY   STATUS             RESTARTS        AGE
my-cluster-zookeeper-0   0/1     CrashLoopBackOff   5 (2m16s ago)   16m
my-cluster-zookeeper-1   1/1     Running            0               16m
my-cluster-zookeeper-2   1/1     Running            0               16m

> $ kubectl logs $CLUSTER_NAME-zoookeeper-0 | grep "Unable to load database on disk" | tail -n1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ kubectl logs $CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper-0 | grep "Unable to load database on disk" | tail -n1
```

Author: ah ha, nice catch!

2024-03-01 08:53:40,806 ERROR Unable to load database on disk (org.apache.zookeeper.server.quorum.QuorumPeer) [main]
```

> We need to remove all servers data from the Zookeeper volumes to allow it get re-synced with the leader.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to remove all data from the failed Zookeeper volumes to allow it get re-synced with the leader.
```

> To do that, we need to make sure the "ACCESS MODES" of volumes is RWO.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Double check that the volume access mode is ReadWriteOnly (RWO).
```

```sh

> kubectl get pvc
> NAME                          STATUS   VOLUME                                     CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   STORAGECLASS                           AGE
> data-my-cluster-kafka-0       Bound    pvc-f6b0c36c-7ca3-497f-ab27-9b7141742b42   10Gi       RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   12m
> data-my-cluster-kafka-1       Bound    pvc-c1432517-6289-4976-a927-be1c3b3cd8bd   10Gi       RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   12m
> data-my-cluster-kafka-2       Bound    pvc-668096d4-5b79-40b6-be5f-ef9c31cdd3a8   10Gi       RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   12m
> data-my-cluster-zookeeper-0   Bound    pvc-8e8d3aac-2e38-4f1c-b11e-dd66003cbcae   5Gi        RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   13m
> data-my-cluster-zookeeper-1   Bound    pvc-f79b9a18-515d-4992-b92f-186a93ca05ff   5Gi        RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   13m
> data-my-cluster-zookeeper-2   Bound    pvc-2b390fa8-f791-478d-9136-d4e44b4a8e80   5Gi        RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   13m

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ kubectl get pvc -l strimzi.io/name=$CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper
NAME                          STATUS   VOLUME                                     CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   STORAGECLASS                           AGE
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-0   Bound    pvc-8e8d3aac-2e38-4f1c-b11e-dd66003cbcae   5Gi        RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   13m
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-1   Bound    pvc-f79b9a18-515d-4992-b92f-186a93ca05ff   5Gi        RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   13m
data-my-cluster-zookeeper-2   Bound    pvc-2b390fa8-f791-478d-9136-d4e44b4a8e80   5Gi        RWO            ocs-external-storagecluster-ceph-rbd   13m
```

> NODE_HOSTNAME="$(kubectl describe pod my-cluster-zookeeper-0 | grep Node: | awk '{print $2}' | cut -d / -f1)"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ NODE_HOSTNAME="$(kubectl describe pod my-cluster-zookeeper-0 | grep Node: | awk '{print $2}' | cut -d / -f1)"
```

kubectl run kubectl-remove-zookeeper-0 -itq --rm --restart "Never" --image "foo" --overrides "$(cat sessions/006/resources/patch-zk.yaml \

> | yq ".spec.nodeSelector.\"kubernetes.io/hostname\" = \"$NODE_HOSTNAME\"" \

Author: Add `nodeSelector` to force the pod to be scheduled to the expected node.

> kubectl run kubectl-remove-zookeeper-0 -itq --rm --restart "Never" --image "foo" --overrides "$(cat sessions/006/resources/patch-zk.yaml \
> | yq ".spec.nodeSelector.\"kubernetes.io/hostname\" = \"$NODE_HOSTNAME\"" \
> | yq ".spec.volumes[0].persistentVolumeClaim.claimName = \"data-my-cluster-zookeeper-0\"" \
> | yq -p yaml -o json)"
> 
> removed '/zookeeper/data/version-2/acceptedEpoch'
> removed '/zookeeper/data/version-2/currentEpoch'
> removed '/zookeeper/data/version-2/log.200000001'
> removed '/zookeeper/data/version-2/snapshot.0'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ kubectl run kubectl-remove-zookeeper-0 -itq --rm --restart "Never" --image "foo" --overrides "$(cat sessions/006/resources/patch-zk.yaml \
| yq ".spec.nodeSelector.\"kubernetes.io/hostname\" = \"$NODE_HOSTNAME\"" \
| yq ".spec.volumes[0].persistentVolumeClaim.claimName = \"data-$CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper-0\"" \
| yq -p yaml -o json)"
removed '/zookeeper/data/version-2/acceptedEpoch'
removed '/zookeeper/data/version-2/currentEpoch'
removed '/zookeeper/data/version-2/log.200000001'
removed '/zookeeper/data/version-2/snapshot.0'
```

```

> Delete the pod to force it restarted. After restarted, it'll become "running" state after syncing up with the leader.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Restart all failed pods so that they can sync up with the leader.
```

```sh

> $ kubectl delete po $CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper-0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ kubectl delete po $CLUSTER_NAME-zookeeper-0 --force
```

pod "my-cluster-zookeeper-0" deleted

$ kubectl get po -l strimzi.io/cluster=$CLUSTER_NAME
NAME                                          READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
my-cluster-entity-operator-7d6d6bd454-sh7rc   3/3     Running   0          96s
my-cluster-kafka-0                            1/1     Running   0          5m9s
my-cluster-kafka-1                            1/1     Running   0          5m9s
my-cluster-kafka-2                            1/1     Running   0          5m9s
my-cluster-zookeeper-0                        1/1     Running   0          6m14s
my-cluster-zookeeper-1                        1/1     Running   0          6m14s
my-cluster-zookeeper-2                        1/1     Running   0          6m14s

> $ kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic t0 --create

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --create --topic t0
```

> $ kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --topic t0 --describe

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --describe --topic t0
```

my-cluster-entity-operator-7d6d6bd454-sh7rc   3/3     Running   0          96s
my-cluster-kafka-0                            1/1     Running   0          5m9s
my-cluster-kafka-1                            1/1     Running   0          5m9s
my-cluster-kafka-2                            1/1     Running   0          5m9s
my-cluster-zookeeper-0                        1/1     Running   0          6m14s
my-cluster-zookeeper-1                        1/1     Running   0          6m14s
my-cluster-zookeeper-2                        1/1     Running   0          6m14s

$ kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --create --topic t0
Created topic t0.

$ kubectl-kafka bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server $CLUSTER_NAME-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --describe --topic t0
Topic: t0	TopicId: 1Sgy6V-CR0K7MMJ9khDuRw	PartitionCount: 3	ReplicationFactor: 3	Configs: min.insync.replicas=2,message.format.version=3.0-IV1
	Topic: t0	Partition: 0	Leader: 0	Replicas: 0,2,1	Isr: 0,2,1
	Topic: t0	Partition: 1	Leader: 2	Replicas: 2,1,0	Isr: 2,1,0
	Topic: t0	Partition: 2	Leader: 1	Replicas: 1,0,2	Isr: 1,0,2
```

> If there are only 1 node with storage issue, please go through the same process for the specific node.

Reviewer: Should we remove this line?

Author: As discussed, we can keep this line since it will let users know this procedure also works for single node down case.
